---
layout: post
title:  "DNS Crash Course"
---

![image-title-here](/assets/img/cloud_ice.jpg){:class="img-responsive"}

There is no cloud, there is only someone else's computer. 

**DNS** stands for *Domain Name System* and it translates domain
names, for example *github.io* into an **IP or Internet Protocol**
address. The IP address of github.io at time of this writing is:
185.199.110.153 The IP address points to a specific "location" on the
internet. It is this address that your browser, for example Firefox,
uses to look up the computer on which the website you wish to view is
stored. 

A **Domain Name Registrar** is an organization that maintains a list
of who owns/controls what domain names. All registrars operate under a
license granted by **ICANN or the Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers.** ICANN is a non-profit organization that is
comprised of multiple stakeholders and is based in the US. In addition
to specifying a responsible party for a domain name, the Registrar
also provides a list of at least two **nameservers**. The nameserver
is the server, computer, that stores and provides the **DNS Records**
for a given domain name.

Almost all domain name registrars maintain their own
nameservers. However, it is not uncommon for registrants, those who
register/own domain names, to use name servers associated with their
hosting company, a company like Cloudflare that provides caching and
anti DOS services, or even operate their own nameservers in the case
of larger companies. Each **hostname** like github.io has a DNS server
that is the *authoritative nameserver* for the hostname. Other servers
can store the DNS information for a domain name for a limited amount
of time, called caching. Most modern computers do **not** contact the
authoritative nameserver for a hostname each time it is typed into the
browser. Most internet providers, like Comcast or Century Link,
operate intermediate DNS servers to speed up the time it takes to
translate a hostname into an IP address. Because of this, sometimes
changing DNS records takes some time to take effect on all machines on
the internet. This is called *DNS propagation*.

## DNS Records

The nameserver stores a list of records for each hostname. This
includes records for any subdomains, eg *srmalins* is the subdomain of
*srmalins.github.io* and through the magic of github points to the
same servers, that is IP addresses, as the primary domain *github.io*
and that is how you get the page you are viewing right now. While I
won't provide a complete breakdown of the various types of DNS
records, two that are commonly used are **CNAME** records and **MX**
records. 

### CNAME

A **CNAME** record points a hostname to another hostname. For example
if you wanted a site to be available at both *www.site.tld* and
*site.tld* you could have an **A** record (the main type of DNS
record) pointing from *site.tld* to the IP address of your hosting
server and then a **CNAME** record that points from *www.site.tld* to
*site.tld* 

### MX

**MX** stands for *Mail eXchange* and it defines what server should
handle the email for a hostname. When you send email to
*user@example.com* your email program (or likely your SMTP server)
looks up the **MX** record for *example.com* to find out what server
handles the mail for that email address. 

A domain can have multiple MX records, and each is given a
priority. Each MX server is attempted in ascending order of priority
(ie a server with priority 10 is tried before a server with priority
20) until one of them responds that it can handle email for that
address. This allows redundancy to ensure that email can be delivered
even if one or more of the servers crash or must be taken offline for
some reason. 

## Final Words

I've intentionally left out many of the complex details, including
edge cases, in these explanations. The intent was to provide a high
level overview, and I apologize if it lacks the depth necessary for
improved precision. Most of the time DNS is something that *Just Works
(tm)* but when things go wrong DNS can often cause insidious and hard
to pin down problems. 
